[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Ancient Eastern cultures have
detailed descriptions of energy
centers in the body
called chakras.
But is there scientific
evidence of chakras?
And if so, can these
energetic areas
be the key to lowering
stress and curing illnesses?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In 1975, professor of
Kinesiology at UCLA,
Dr. Valerie Hunt, recorded
radiation emanating
from the body in areas that
are traditionally associated
with the chakra points.
She also recorded sound
wave frequencies and colors
associated with the
chakras, which corresponded
to the colors that the
ancient Indian Hindu
tradition established.
>> Dr. Valerie Hunt was actually
able to record the chakras that
are, of course, in the body.
And they also extend
beyond the body,
and determine the colors of
them and the sounds of them.
We've proven that these
flow through the body.
>> Absolutely.
>> You can't see
them with an X-ray.
But scientists have used
radioactive isotopes--
>> Oh, they have?
Yes.
>> --to actually
track the movement.
>> Yes.
>> There have also been studies
on the energy channels that
lead to the chakras, called
nadis in the Indian tradition
or meridians in the
Chinese tradition.
In the 1980s, two
French researchers
injected radioactive technetium
into the accupoints of patients
and used nuclear
scanning equipment
to follow the flow
of technetium.
When the true accupoints
were injected,
the radioactive technetium
followed the exact pathways
as the acupuncture meridians
in the ancient charts
of Chinese acupuncture.
The word, chakra, comes from
the Indian Sanskrit word
for wheel, which describes
the round vortex-like energy
centers along the sushumna
nadi, which runs along
the spine of the human body.
The chakras are essentially
storage places for vital energy
forces that connect the
physical body to the layers
of the auric field.
Each chakra operates at
a specific frequency,
which determines its
color and characteristics.
Most familiar is the
seven chakra system,
starting with the root chakra
at the base of the spine
and moving up to the crown
chakra at the top of the head.
However, there are
many more chakras
that you can work with
in and around the body.
>> We find many different
chakra systems are taught
in accordance with different
practices and in accordance
with different practitioners.
Five chakra systems, six,
seven, nine chakra systems,
12 chakra systems, all the
way up to 21, or even 108
chakras if you include
all these subtle energy
centers in the various
limbs of the body.
>> Practitioners use a tool
called a pendulum to read
the chakras.
When a chakra is
in balance, energy
is free-flowing and spinning
clockwise at a constant medium
rate.
>> And I'd say I'm
about 3 inches out,
and I'm right in front of it.
And I'm getting great
clockwise movement.
And it's quite
large, by the way.
Good for you.
>> When it is spinning
counterclockwise,
or if it is spinning too
rapidly, or too slowly,
or not at all, these
are all indications
of an out-of-balance chakra.
>> What stops our chakras
dead in the water is taking
an emotion and saying, I'm
not going to feel that.
>> Just move on.
- Yeah.
That energy freezes just like
your blood or your lymph.
You want it moving all the time.
And so when it stops moving, it
makes your field, your energy
field all muddy looking.
And ultimately, since our bodies
grow out of our energy fields--
this such a key point--
the body actually
grows out of the field.
Your body's ultimately going
to look like your field.
>> There is now additional
technology available to assist
in reading the chakras, a new
device called the Bio-Well,
invented by Russian scientist,
Konstantin Korotkov,
is able to scan the chakras
from a person's fingertips using
an electrophotonic
imaging technique.
The reading is then registered
by a computer program
and analyzed by a
practitioner to see
what is out of alignment.
It is said by experts that
out-of-balance chakras can
manifest as physical illnesses
or emotional imbalances
when we are not in alignment
with our life experiences.
>> The chakras are
not able to roll.
And that stuck the chakras,
and it becomes an illness--
sick.
So every process that we
think is something bad that
is happening to us, it's not
because someone is sending that
to us; it's because we are
stuck in the process of not
understanding why we
choose this experience.
>> So how do you balance a
chakra once its energy has
gotten blocked,
stagnant, or too open?
Well, there are many ways
to correct these imbalances,
including meditating on
the out-of balance chakra,
eating foods that are of
the same color or vibration,
using tuning forks or
other instruments that
hold the same frequency
of the chakra,
working on stuck emotions
in the area of the chakra,
and doing certain yoga, tai
chi, or qi gong practices that
stimulate the energy
of the chakra,
using herbs or
essential oils, getting
a reflexology, acupuncture,
or Reiki session, and more.
There are also
numerous studies that
show the efficacy of energy
healing practices related
to the chakras.
In one early 1980s
study, therapeutic touch,
an energy healing technique
where the practitioner places
their hands on or near the
patient to balance the chakras,
was put to the test.
Dr. John Zimmerman used
a superconducting quantum
interference device at the
University of Colorado School
of Medicine in
Denver, and discovered
that a huge, pulsating bio
magnetic field emanated
from the hands of a
therapeutic touch practitioner.
The biomagnetic
pulsations from the hands
swept back and forth
through the full range
of therapeutic frequencies, thus
being able to stimulate healing
in any part of the body.
In both 2006 and 2008,
stressed out lab rats
received Reiki treatments.
And they all showed
significantly reduced
stress, anxiety, and
depression responses.
Fake Reiki treatments were
given to the placebo group.
And they showed no reduction in
stress, anxiety, or depression.
>> We have so many people
after cancer treatment that are
suffering from such
debilitating amounts of fatigue,
including brain fog,
inability to get up and move.
And I thought,
well, why aren't we
looking at energy
healing for this?
We were going to do a
randomized controlled trial.
So we did our placebo.
And we had a group of
skeptical scientists
who mimicked the hand positions.
We found that the actual energy
healing not only dramatically
reduced fatigue; within a month,
their brain fog had lifted.
But also the rhythms of
cortisol in their body improved.
>> People are experiencing a
wide range of benefits from
balancing their chakras,
whether it's from acupuncture,
meditation, Reiki, or some
of the other chakra balancing
practices.
So getting to know where energy
might be stuck or too open
and balancing those
energies could possibly
help you to not only
heal from illnesses,
but to prevent illness from
manifesting to begin with.
A balanced chakra system could
mean a healthier body, mind,
and spirit.
[MUSIC PLAYING]